now the Dutch government says it will
appeal a Court ruling to stop exports of
War plan spare parts to Israel the
announcement came hours after Dutch
judges upheld an appeal by human rights
organizations they argued that helping
to maintain the F35 stealth Jets
contributed to Israel's violations of
international law the ruling says the
Netherlands needs to stop exporting any
parts destined for Israel within 7 Days
the parts are American owned but stored
in Dutch warehouses ready for shipping
the F-35 is widely regarded as the
world's most advanced war plane Israel
was the first International buyer of the
US jets in 2016 is also the only country
in the Middle East to fly them the
Israeli Air Force has dozens of f-35s
its latest purchase was in July 25 Jets
financed by $3 billion in US military
aid the Israeli squadrons are due to be
reinforced in three batches beginning in
2027 let's go to step vson who joins us
live in the ha and step how much of a
difference do we assume this ruling
there will
make well this is definitely seen as a
landmark ruling by the appeal court in
the ha because it's the first time that
the court is ordering a state to stop
sending weapons to Israel uh during the
30 minute verdict the judge dismissed
all the arguments by the Dutch State
saying that they needed to continue to
to send the spare parts talking about
political motives the the very strong
ties the Netherlands has with the us but
also with Israel that could be japanized
but also economic ties because of course
it's an interesting export product but
it was all dismissed because the judge
said that there is a serious risk that
these weapons are used and that there
are very uh strong uh uh risks that the
international humanitarian laws is
seriously being violated by Israel in
Gaza and I'm right here at the Oxfam
office one of the uh rights
organizations who have filed the case
and I'm talking to the director mikil
SAS about this verdict how significant
do you see this Verdict by the court in
the he looking at the war in Gaza right
now yeah well I think it's very
significant and I'm I'm happy that the
court was so clear also in its uh in its
ruling uh today uh I'm hopeful that it
will change the behaviors of my own
government the Dutch government and it
must because they need to obey by this
ruling I also hope that it's a turning
point that governments in Europe or
elsewhere who have supported Israel so
far uh will look themselves in the
mirror and realize that they are in fact
um co-responsible or even complicit of
the violations taking place uh in Gaza
as we speak basically some say it could
also be used as a precedent for other
groups like yours like Oxfam in other
countries because we know other
countries like Germany are still
supplying weapons to Israel as well and
what what do you know about this yes
well we have been in contact with many
other groups including other Oxfam also
in countries but also other uh
non-governmental organizations who have
been following our court case from the
beginning we started somewhere in
November uh and I received numerous
messages today of people first
congratulating us of course with this uh
important win in court but also
immediately asking for all the
information so they can use it in their
own countries to pressure their own
governments to change those policies
there the main objective of course is
was to relieve the suffering of the
people in Gaza how do you see this
verdict now affecting the civilians in
Gaza right now well that's difficult uh
to see and to say at this moment I would
say especially today with all the uh the
horrible news we again hear from Rafa
and from other places uh in Gaza
uh I have colleagues there oxam
colleagues who work in Gaza who are
currently based as refugees in Rafa at
least for today this news that I could
bring for them was a little bit of Hope
a little bit of light a little bit of
yeah realizing that people in other
places are thinking about them I don't
think it will change the situation on
the ground immediately but I hope that
this uh verdict here in the Netherlands
is a turning point in the behaviors of
our governments here and that makes it
possible to put much much more pressure
on Israel to stop the uh the attacks
there in Gaza thank you very much for
joining us here in the in the program
what we know is that these f-35s have a
very high maintenance it is sad that one
hour of flying needs three hours of
Maintenance and that there is a shortage
of these spare parts what is now
expecting uh to happen is that Israel
will need to find some other suppliers
and it's more likely that this is coming
from the US but the US of course is much
further away and it will definitely be
leading to a scramble to make sure that
these F-35 can still uh fly uh to Gaza
from Israel step vson in the heg many
thanks